Margaret Starbird was a devout Catholic,
a mother of five and a military wife
when she stumbled on some literature
that both frightened her and forced her
to begin researching what she later referred to
as "the lost story of Mary Magdalene."
Aided by her academic background with
a masters degree in Comparative Literature,
and the support of her priest
and bible study group, Margaret ultimately
came to understand that the demotion of one of
the Bible's most influential women to the status
of prostitute, was both unforgivable and heretical.
Furthermore, she says that misrepresentation of Mary
was intentional on the part of those who revised the Bible.
So convincing was her work, in fact, that Dan Brown
based much of his research into Mary Magdalene's life
in The Da Vinci Code on Margaret's work.
This modest and truth-driven woman
captured our minds and hearts.
I only have a couple of questions
to ask you because we're on a really tight lead
and I know that, so how did we, throughout history,
in all the ancient texts lose the Bride?
I think we lost the Bride in the Christian story
on the day after the Resurrection
because I think there was danger to her,
especially if she was expecting.
The family of Jesus would have taken her
to a place of safety, so that's really the subject
of my Alabaster Jar story that they took
this woman to a place of safety.
It's just a little 20 page piece of fiction
in the beginning of my Alabaster Jar book,
which is nonfiction, but the little story there
tells how this might have happened,
how did we lose the Bride, and I think it
was just a matter of safety for her, and then
having lost her they didn't know how to get her back.
But would you say there might have also
been ulterior motives of some of the disciples?
It seems as though from what I've heard in your work
that the ancient texts are rife with information
that basically puts the woman, and puts
Mary Magdalene in a lower light.
Actually, the texts that I use are
the canonical gospels, there she is
the beloved of Jesus, you can tell that
because on the eight lists she's mentioned first
on seven of those eight lists of women
that traveled with Jesus, so that's one indication,
the other is that she is the only person mentioned
at the Cross and at the Tomb in all four Gospels.
I don't use Gnostic texts to support my claims,
I claim that she was already recognized by
the entire Pagan world of converts to Christianity.
She was recognized as the archetypal bride
because of the relationship of the
Passion narrative and the Gospels to
the ancient liturgies of the sacrificed King
whose Bride meets him in the garden.
How did we then get to
where we are now, which in the Bible,
puts women, quote, "in their place"?
How did that happen because now those
are the myths that we're left with
that are really affecting all the cultures
of the world today, not just Christianity?
I think the setting in the mid-second century
with the conversion of Tertullian to Christianity,
he and some the other church fathers from
that period have terrible things to say about women
and they're coming from a position of
worship of Artemis, and the Montenists
and other, what we would consider, "heretical Christians"
who deny the body and go only with the spiritual and they
say really disastrous things about women in their writings.
We're talking about high profile...
We're talking about the Church fathers.
We also have the letter of Timothy, 1 Timothy, it says,
"I do not allow women to teach or preach
" or have authority over men."
But yet, in Paul's epistles, we know that the nature
of Christianity at the very beginning, at the outset,
was apostles and the brothers of Jesus
traveling with their sister wives, and what is that
but a partnership, it's missionary couples travelling
together to spread the good news.
So Christianity has really had,
at it's core, a position in keeping women down
in terms of authority and power.
Only after the second century--
After the second century, until now.
The model that Christ tried to implant
was the model of sacred partnership
and his partner was Magdelene,
and it's clear from the Gospels that that's the case.
What's happened to us a species?
As a result of this distortion of information?
The distortion that's set in the second century
silenced women, Mary Magdalene was sent into exile,
physically, in her body, as a historical human being
in the first century right after the Crucifixion
and then later, her voice is silenced
by the Church fathers, along with all other women
who tried to teach or preach in
the second to fourth centuries.
And in the fourth century they actually anathematized
all the Gnostic gospels that had raised Mary Magdalene
up as the beloved, the favorite disciple of Jesus,
who knew him best, after that period then,
her story goes into exile, and with her
every woman on the planet, well,
everyone in the Christian tradition.
It doesn't appear that
most of the great religions of the world,
we'll exclude Buddhism, for example,
but other than that it doesn't appear
that women have been particularly elevated
in the last millenia in any of them.
One of the most interesting books I ever read
was a book by Peter Kingsly called
"The In the Dark Places of Wisdom"
about the loss of the Sophia, because in
the very ancient times the philosphers
were lovers of Sophia, the wisdom of god,
and we even know that Solomon took wisdom
as his Bride, this is a symbolic case of studying
and learning wisdom, but wisdom wasn't just
a matter of books, it was about going into
the unconscious and mining the treasures of
the unconscious through vision, dream, trance
and intuition, getting in touch with reality from within.
Those are the kinds of secrets that we've lost
in our whole western world, and of course,
our western world has spread out
into all corners of the globe as well.
What's so beautiful about your work
is that you show this through ancient artwork--
And Medieval.
And Medieval
renaissance artwork, which is just beautiful.
One of them I've seen that I love,
I'd never seen it before, myself,
is in Michael Angelo's Creation in the Sistine Chapel
that God has his arm around Sophia,
the goddess of wisdom, I had never noticed that
because our minds are so conditioned
to see the two fingers pointing.
What else have we been missing in some of
the great artworks that we should start looking for now?
I know DaVinci Code's going to have people
all juiced up, and he refers to his research, including you.
Well, there are many things, the letter X was a symbol for
the alternative Christianity, the Church of Amor,
the Church of Love, as opposed to the Church of Roma.
Backward.
Yes,
and they also call themselves the Church of Enlightenment
and their letter X represented the word "light", lux,
L-U-X, in Latin, and so the letter X was
their representative and we have pictures,
I haven't pointed this out always,
like in Georges de La Tour's painting
where Mary Magdalene is sitting next to a mirror
we have the twin flames there,
they're also represented with a double "X"
which is nothing but the letter "V"
the "blade letter", the lambda from Greek,
makes two "X's", it's like the symbol for the
Free Mason's with their compass and their T-square
it forms the double "X" which is the twin flames.
These historical references go back
beyond the time of Jesus and Mary Magdalene as well?
Some of the symbolism probably does but--
Back to Osiris and Isis,
and some of the story, some of the ritual.
The Song of Songs is actually a rewriting of
the ancient liturgies of Isis and Osiris
and Isis is called "my sister, my bride"
and so is the Bride in the Song of Songs,
so we have a lot of connections, in fact there are
parallel lines in those two pieces of sacred writing.
So we know that the Song of Songs was very important to
the Jewish community at the time of Jesus,
they actually found two copies of that text in
the Dead Sea Scrolls, so the Jewish community loved
the Song of Songs, Rabbi Akiva, the second century
said it was the "holiest of holies", all Scriptures
are holy, the Song of Songs is the holy of holies.
What is it but a representation of God's love
for his people, that's the way they viewed it,
but it's actually very erotic poetry from the sacred
marriage rites of the ancient god and goddess couple.
I suppose this period of history is fabulous
because we're starting to dig,
We are uncovering
all these things.
it's like
revelations, all these things are
being revealed at this time, and your part in it,
your inspiration in doing this and your drive,
do you have something in you that
goes beyond just intellectual curiosity in this whole thing?
I came to this because my prayer group
that I was in, my charismatic prayer group
was shown that there was something radically wrong
at the very heart of Christianity from it's foundation.
A design flaw, if you will, and the more we prayed about it
the more convinced we became that
this was the case but we didn't know what was wrong
until I read Holy Blood Holy Grail.
Then when I put two and two together I realized,
okay, what we lost then, was the sacred feminine,
we lost our connection with the Bride.
I firmly believe that the very first Christian heresy
was the denial of the Bride.
I think most people that have begun to
get onto this trail would certainly agree with you in that
and what do we have to gain now
by starting to bring back the lost knowledge
by beginning to reveal all that has had to be
encoded and hidden from view all these years.
What a shame to have had such a simple
and beautiful and natural aspect of our lineage.
We lost our birthright, our birthright was to have been
the mandala of sacred partnership
and that partnership exists at all levels.
It's male and female, it's light and dark,
east and west, up and down, it's wave and particle theory
and it's God in us, and that's what we lost
when we lost this connection of Christ and Magdelene.
So what do you see, and what do you expect
to have happen historically, looking back on this period of
I call it revelations and that all is being revealed--
It's time for the "nuptials of the lamb".
There's a beautiful stained glass window
picture on my website but it's also
in a church in Scotland, on the Isle of Mull
a beautiful window showing
Jesus and Mary Magdalene hand-fasted,
which is a symbol for marriage,
and in the background are the twin towers,
and it goes back to the Song of Songs where
the Bride says, "I am a wall and my breasts are towers."
What's she's saying is that she represents
the city of Jerusalem as the holy city.
This picture, this stained glass window
actually represents the nuptials of
the Lamb and his Bride, and it's time to
make that the mandala for the Christian story.
While this is happening you often see
women almost rebelling because of the fact
this has been suppressed for so long
and almost going full-tilt the other way
and not acknowledging the masculine presence.
Can you talk about that just a bit?
Yes, you can go off the deep end.
The masculine is represented by the blade,
the feminine by the water triangle
and when you put them together you
have this beautiful garden, the English garden,
but if you have the masculine without the feminine,
you have the desert and things blowing up in the desert.
And if you have the feminine without the masculine,
you have an abyss or a swamp.
What you really want is to get the two together
they are each other's mutual aberration society
but they're also a fire and water insurance.
You don't want one without the other.
What you want is the harmony of both.
That's what all people need to integrate
those two aspects in themselves,
the twin flames and yourself, and then
that spreads out into your marriage,
into your home and family.
Religions have an awful lot vested
in maintaining the dogma as it is.
In Judaism, in the first century, there
was no word for bachelor.
(Voiceover laughs)
The word they use now is "ravak" which means "empty".
In Judaism is was disobedience to
the Law of God not to marry and procreate.
One clue right there
that Jesus was likely married like all--
He said he came to fulfill the Scripture,
not to destroy it.
If you're looking back,
at this time now, and what you're doing,
what kind of seeds do you see happening,
what do you see with the "DaVinci Code" movie
and just the beginnings in pop culture
of the revelation of this knowledge?
I don't know what "The DaVinci Code" movie
is going to do, it's a movie about a fast-paced
mystery novel, but I think people go back to
look at the sources that he used,
and actually examine the assertions
that he makes seem a little wild
because he doesn't back them up
but mine are all backed up in Scripture.
Do you see religion making a shift
as a result of this, what's going to happen?
You're a good Catholic girl with five kids
and you're a heretic. (laughs)
A heretic teaches what the Church doesn't teach.
A prophet teaches what the Church doesn't teach yet.
I teach what they taught at the
beginning and have forgotten.
To follow up on her work, pick up a copy of
"The Woman With the Alabaster Jar"
or one of her other works by clicking on
the Amazon button below.
Until next time, thanks for watching.
(tinkling music)